page 161

# [Authorship and Libertine Celebrity: Harriette Wilson's Regency Memoirs](https://www.academia.edu/1609376/_Authorship_and_Libertine_Celebrity_Harriette_Wilson_s_Regency_Memoirs_In_Libertine_Enlightenment_Sex_Liberty_and_Licence_in_the_Eighteenth_Century_Ed_Peter_Cryle_and_Lisa_O_Connell_London_Palgrave_2004_161_181)
*by Lisa O'Connell*

[W]e are the two greatest people in Europe! Scott in his way, I in mine! Every thing which comes after us will be but base copies.
Harriette Wilson, *The Memoirs of Harriette Wilson Written by Herself* (1825)

[Y]ou are all of you copies and I am the thing itself.
Harriette Wilson, 'Letter to Edward Bulwer-Lytton',
August 1829, cited in Sadleir (1933)

Harriette Wilson, the English Regency's most famous courtesan, has long been the subject of popular biography and a fixture of belletristic accounts of the period.[1] Her *Memoirs* in particular are a touchstone for evocations of the *élan* of Regency high life. Surprisingly, however, beyond routine acknowledgments of her sexual notoriety and the media sensation caused by her *Memoirs*, Wilson remains largely unnoticed in current critical and scholarly work. This essay aims to begin the process of rectifying that neglect by placing her *Memoirs* in the broader networks of fashion, print and publicity, which were the preconditions of her fame. It argues that her 'whore's story' played a unique and formative role in the convergence of sexual, literary and media cultures which marked the Regency public sphere and the modes of authorship and self promotion that it licensed.

## Demirep public spheres

Wilson's story repeats many of the familiar motifs of the *chronique scandaleuse*: humble origins and an early seduction, followed by a

---
page 162

flourishing sexual career that brought her into contact with some of the nation’s most powerful men. She was born in Mayfair, as Harriette Dubochet, in 1786, one of eight daughters of a Swiss-born shopkeeper, John James Dubochet, and Amelia Cook, natural child of a country gentleman (Thirkell 1936, p. 12). To avoid the misery caused by her father’s rancorous temper and the drudgery of the family trade of silk stocking repairs, she followed the examples of two of her older sisters, Amy and Fanny, by leaving home in her teens to try her luck with the young West End men of fashion who walked by, and frequented, the family shop (Wilson 1830, p. xxix). By about 1805 she had formed an alliance with her sister Fanny and their friend Julia Johnstone, the daughter of a former maid of honour to Queen Charlotte at Hampton Court, who had been raised in circumstances of impoverished gentility and had lived for years as the ‘wife’ of a married army officer, Colonel Cotton. Widely known as ‘the three graces’, they operated a demirep coterie in open rivalry with their older sister Amy’s already fashionable circle. The peers who patronized them included the Duke of Wellington, the Marquis of Lorne, Lord Hertford, the Duke of Leinster and the Marquis of Worcester.

The world of ‘demirepdom’ (to use a term of the time) that Wilson entered was a space of sexual licence on edges of high society where women made themselves available as paid mistresses to men of rank. It is important to note that demireps enjoyed the leisure pursuits of their aristocratic patrons, even if they were required to forgo any claim to respectability. Their liminal social status – part-common prostitute, part-stylish consort, part-love object – was reflected in the host of equivocal terms used to refer to them; indeed in this period terms such as ‘demireps’ (women of questionable reputation), ‘kept mistresses’ and ‘women on the town’ were succeeded by a new, more ‘delicate’ vocabulary of sexual commerce which referred to ‘fashionable impures’, ‘Cytherean beauties’, ‘interesting connexions’ and ‘Fair Cyprians’ (Westmacott2 1826, p. 21; Adburgham 1983, p. 61). Of course, there is an element of sneering facetiousness in this language – Charles Westmacott, for instance, wrote satirically of the Wilson coterie as ‘stars of the first magnitude in the hemisphere of Fashion’ (1826, p. 10), ‘Paphian dames of the metropolis’ (1826, p. 21), and ‘fair, frail … belles of the ton’ (1826, p. 10).

None the less Westmacott’s blending of urban and stellar metaphors was prescient. No longer strictly speaking a courtesan, a figure of the court, but rather a figure of the ton, an elite urban sphere, the highclass prostitute marks an interface between older cultures of aristocratic

---
page 163

exclusivity and the newer commercialized and increasingly mediatized public sphere. Within this context, success depended on cutting a dashing public figure and thereby accruing a fashionable reputation among an elite circle of metropolitan men. Using specific public spaces to meet men and display themselves, demireps became well known (sometimes indeed touristic) objects of attention and rumour. The Wilson coterie took boxes at the opera and the theatre, rode open carriages in Hyde Park and attended suppers, parties and balls that were held at gentlemen’s clubs like Watier’s, or in their private rooms.

Because no respectable woman would receive them, the demireps’ circulation in high society was limited to its margins, namely, to its openly public or exclusively male spaces. And yet they were deeply attractive to men for more reasons than their sexual availability. They could offer a kind of companionship not to be found among more respectable women, and their relative freedom seems to have been one of the reasons that so many young men fell deeply in love with them, usually transiently but often causing major family rifts, and occasionally leading to marriage (if not with their lovers then with men under the patronage of their lovers who were recruited as husbands once the primary affair was over). In Wilson’s case, one young aristocrat was so devoted to her that his parents incarcerated him at the family estate in order to prevent him marrying her – an episode her *Memoirs* represent as a comic inversion of the Richardsonian seduction plot. Here it is the labouring class woman, Wilson, who figures as a rapacious libertine, endangering a young nobleman’s virtue and honour.

Demireps circulated from one man to another, available serially to a group or club, which was in part defined by its success in pursuing and paying for them, and its shared experience of having sex with them. We can assume that at least some of the esprit de corps amongst the officer class, for instance, was generated by tacit demimonde networks of a kind shared by the heroes of the Waterloo campaign, the Duke of Wellington, and his aide de camp, the Marquis of Worcester – both of whom were lovers of Harriette Wilson. Certainly, one of the forces that bound male oligarchic society into a unity was its members’ access to the caste of demireps who were, individually, objects of mimetic desire, simultaneously producing solidarity and competitiveness among their clientele. As Wilson states the case somewhat disingenuously in her *Memoirs*: ‘I cannot account for the prejudice which runs high in my favour among … young men of rank … neither can I be tender and true to a dozen … at a time’ (1909, p. 315). She none the less developed (or at any rate claimed to

---
page 164

develop) a self-styled ethic of exclusivity that directly spoke to this contradiction. She enforced strict rules of etiquette within her circle; no man was allowed to enter her opera box unless he had been regularly introduced by one of her friends. And she prided herself on the steadiness of her attachments, asserting that it was ‘contrary to my taste and principles to leave any man I had once favoured as long as he gave me no excuse to complain of him’ (1909, p. 565). Indeed, the narrative structure of Wilson’s *Memoirs* turns on the delicate business of replacing one protector with another – a manoeuvre that required considerable tact precisely because it involved both exclusivity and seriality. Demirep success depended on balancing availability, self-display and public identity with an aura of singularity. The courtesan of fashion was all at once a public woman – highly visible and available to numerous men – and a singular and unique love object, and it was in these terms that she anticipated the dynamic of modern celebrity.

Wilson’s world was an especially masculine and public one. Her particular success seems to have owed a great deal to her wit, conversational charm and bonhomie; it was often noticed that, unlike many of her peers, she was no great beauty. Taking ‘Harry’ as her nickname, she prided herself on being an ‘excellent fellow’ (‘Letter to Bulwer-Lytton’, August 1829, cited in Sadleir 1933, p. 239), able to move fairly easily between the elite male spheres of privilege and leisure, on the one hand, and honour and service, on the other. When involved with the Whig peer Lord Ponsonby, she regularly waited at Parliament in a hackney coach while he delivered his speeches to the House of Lords, and made efforts to educate herself in the values of constitutional liberty, reading Hansard debates between Fox and Pitt ‘*pour les beaux yeux de milord* Ponsonby’ (Wilson 1909, p. 111). Similarly, when the Marquis of Worcester became an officer with the Tenth Hussars, the so-called ‘dandy regiment’, Wilson accompanied him to Brighton, ‘like a little recruit’ (1909, p. 415), sharing his lodgings, attending his regimental parades and dining alongside him, very often the only woman in the officers’ mess. She soon took to styling herself as a uniformed officer, appearing in her own riding dress trimmed with gold in the style of a ‘regimental cap and habit’ (1909, p. 351) in a kind of playful military cross-dressing.

If Wilson was well known for her capacity to emulate and ironize the aristocratic male culture that surrounded her, she was also able to turn that culture to her advantage. She fashioned herself not just as a dandy and political initiate, but also (depending on the context and the

---
page 165

client) as a good sportsman, soldier and rake. As she saw it, she was not just ‘fashionable’ in the sense of following the styles, trends and manners of her wealthy patrons. Rather, like Beau Brummell, the famous dandy whom she considered a ‘vulgar’ rival (1909, p. 627), she figured herself as a leader, indeed an arbiter, of fashion among her admirers and, in doing so, increased her own value as an object of desire among them. Thus, for instance, the young Duke of Leinster is said to have observed that among Oxford undergraduates circa 1811 white waistcoats, silk stockings and uncurled hair were the current mode because Harriette Wilson endorsed them (1909, p. 214). And when she slummed it as a ‘common servant girl’ to meet Worcester clandestinely, she declared her coarse red cloak and blue stockings ‘a new style of travelling dress … I am going to introduce the fashion’ (1909, p. 428).

The power and relative independence of the courtesan was always shadowed by its transience. Wilson’s star began slowly to fade after about 1812, at the same time that her fifteen-year-old sister, Sophia, achieved a spectacular social elevation by marrying Lord Berwick and dissociating herself from her past. Having given up her chance to marry Worcester and having failed to win a breach of promise suit against his father who had offered her an annuity when she separatedfrom his son, Wilson appeared to have mismanaged the business of trading sexual power for lasting financial security. By the early 1820s she had retreated to Paris, married an impoverished Irish officer, William Henry Rochfort, and begun to beg money of her old friends and patrons, many of whom had ascended to loftier titles, large estates and successful political careers in England.

Faced with a shabby demise, Wilson turned to Grub Street, teaming up with John Joseph Stockdale (son of the famous radical publisher, John Stockdale). The younger Stockdale had published (and lost money on) Percy Shelley’s first collection of poems from his Pall Mall remainder bookshop in 1810, and had since fallen on hard times. An erstwhile member of the Society for the Suppression of Vice, by the 1820s Stockdale was publishing pornographic books and engravings from a shop in the Opera Colonnade, a well-known prostitutes’ haunt. Together, he and Wilson engineered the packaging and marketing of Wilson’s sexual career as a scandalous memoir. But this was not just an enterprise in book selling. Following an already well-established practice, they intended to profit by demanding excision or suppression fees from old clients, using Wilson’s husband as their agent. The deal was that if the money were paid, the client’s name would not appear in the

---
page 166

text. Wilson’s usual fee for silence was £200, and the media reported, probably with some exaggeration, that she and Stockdale netted some £10,000 in combined profits from hush money and sales.

## The Memoirs as media event
The publication of the *Memoirs* in 1825 was by no means the first time that Wilson’s name had appeared in print – there were a number of fraudulent accounts of her life already in circulation. In the early 1820s, she had featured prominently as the Regent’s mistress, the unnamed ‘Mrs. Q----‘, in the radical scandal literature designed to discredit the King during the Queen Caroline affair (McCalman 1993, p. 167). In the aftermath of that affair, William Benbow, the ultra-radical pressman and sometime pornographer, had produced a number of spurious Wilson memoirs – accounts of the life of ‘Mrs. Q—’, partly identified as ‘Harriet [sic] W—n’ – which appeared in both Rambler’s Magazine (1822, pp. 298–306) and pamphlet form.3 Stockdale readily exploited the public interest in Wilson created by these earlier texts and scandals. He let it be known that the real ‘Mrs Q’ was ready to tell her story, or be paid to withhold it, and he advertised Wilson’s authorship in the book’s title – *The Memoirs of Harriette Wilson Written by Herself* – to distinguish it from fraudulent competitors.

The *Memoirs* were first published in numbered instalments and sold from Stockdale’s shop between January and September 1825. Each number was wrapped in a paper cover plastered with advertisements for Stockdale’s own prints and books along with prominent announcements of the names of those appearing in forthcoming issues. The instalments served a number of purposes. First, they minimized the sales profits lost to piracy by rival publishing houses, like those of Edward and John Duncombe, John Dugdale and Benbow himself, all of whom produced cheap editions of the Memoirs almost overnight. Second, they enabled Stockdale to develop tie-in merchandise capitalizing on the book’s success – these included a popular set of coloured plate engravings illustrating Wilson’s adventures, issued late in the series and immediately pirated, as well as multiple new editions of the Memoirs in both cheap paper issues and bound volumes. Third, publication by instalment maximized the amount of money that could be made from excision fees by giving those whose names and stories were scheduled to feature in forthcoming issues numerous opportunities to buy themselves out. And importantly, they gave Wilson the opportunity to edit and expand

---
page 167

her text according to the success or failure of each blackmail attempt.

*The Memoirs of Harriette Wilson* were unquestionably a *succès de scandale*. Their circulation was by any measure ‘astonishing’ – as the *London Magazine* put it (April 1825, p. 610) – running into 31 editions by the year’s end, excluding pirated editions and French and German translations. They generated a number of imitative publications, including a flood of autobiographical writing from actors, dandies and a host of marginal, semi-public figures, which *The Quarterly Review* condemned as ‘drivel[ling] Memorabilia’ (‘Autobiography’ 1827, p. 149). And they attracted an avalanche of censorious comment too, most of which expressed the by now routine concern that the depiction of Wilson’s immoral life might ‘call forth the same offensive conduct in others’ (Commentary, cited in Myer 1999, p. 15).

The real scandal of Wilson’s text, however, was not its obscene or salacious content (there wasn’t any[4]), even its blackmailing agenda (there was nothing new about that) or its supposed contagiousness. Rather, the *Memoirs* caused a stir because of their flagrantly libellous content. Wilson took the unusual step of naming names, and it was her ‘open mention of the cavaliers who had the felicity of her … acquaintance’ (*Bell’s Life in London*, 13 February 1825, p. 49), which gave the book its ‘combustible’ effect (London Magazine 1825, p. 626), sending shock waves through establishment circles and causing a ‘sensation’ in the broader print sphere. So much so that the *Memoirs*’ ongoing publication and reception very soon took on the quality of a self-replicating media event.

In the first instance they were fodder for popular but respectable journals like *Bell’s Life in London* and Sporting Chronicle, a Sunday paper specializing in sport and gossip. Two weeks after the publication of the first issue of the *Memoirs*, on 13 February, *Bell’s Life in London* printed a pirated extract, declaring that the text had ‘excited an extraordinary sensation in the beau monde’ (13 February 1825, p. 49). It went on to run the *Memoirs* as its lead article for the next three months, noting that ‘demand’ for the story ‘is hourly increasing’ (20 February 1825, p. 57). On 6 March it told readers:

*Few publications in modern times have excited such curiosity, or produced more extraordinary sensations in fashionable life. – It finds its way into all circles, and the grave and the gay – the starched puritan, and the professed libertine, are equally sedulous in perusing its pages. – Of its merits as a literary composition, men of the first taste, have spoken in the most favourable terms; and … strong testimony has been borne to the truth of some of the statements …*
(*Bell’s Life in London*, 6 March 1825, p. 73)

---
page 168

Of course, *Bell’s Life in London*’s testimony to the veracity, literary merit and ‘extraordinary’ impact of the *Memoirs* licensed its own coverage of the Wilson sensation. In addition to the extracts themselves, the paper printed a stream of Wilson-related articles: reports on the libel actions against Stockdale (in July, and May 1826) and the arrest of a ‘young retailer of strumpet biography’;[5] letters from readers; and novelty pieces (including a lengthy poem to Harriette Wilson, based on a parody of ‘Collins’s Ode “The Passions” [sic]’). At the same time, its editor speculated about the ‘characters in the higher circles … yet to be *shewn up*’ (6 March 1825, p. 73), and the ‘suppression of the names of certain persons’ (20 February 1825, p. 57).

Indeed, the gossip and excitement which the newspaper press generated around the *Memoirs* centred as much on what Wilson did not say as on what she did, since her extortion racket was public knowledge. This allowed it to follow an ongoing secondary story about the state of negotiations between the blackmailers and their victims. On 6 March, *Bell’s Life in London* reported that the rumoured suppression of the Worcester story from the *Memoirs*’ fifth number was the ‘*on dit* of the day and may or may not have foundation’ (6 March 1825, p. 73). It followed up with a report that Stockdale’s Colonnade shop had ‘almost been taken by storm’ (13 March 1825, p. 81) by buyers impatient to view the fifth number, going on to confirm for its own readers that ‘omissions have been made’ for ‘the style in which the Marquis of Worcester is treated, shews that there is no disposition *now* to *shew him up* in a very unfavourable point of view’ (27 March 1825, p. 97).

There is little doubt that ‘Wilson mania’ (Johnstone 1825, p. 306) of the kind generated by *Bell’s Life in London* and other parasitical and bowdlerized reproductions of the text stimulated Stockdale’s sales as well as their own. Less clear is the degree to which rival publishers produced ‘oppositional’ materials designed to fan the flames of the Wilson sensation. Take, for instance, the memoirs of Wilson’s former friend and fellow demirep, Julia Johnstone, titled *Confessions of Julia Johnstone, Written by herself. In Contradiction to the Fables of Harriette Wilson* (1825). These were published at the height of the Wilson scandal as an enraged rebuttal of Wilson’s ‘lying fabrications’ (1825, p. 6).

---
page 169

It might be possible to read Johnstone’s text as a credible counter-memoir (as some commentators have[6]) were it not published by Benbow, whose earlier, Wilson memoir had been overshadowed by Stockdale’s. Benbow sold and advertised *Confessions of Julia Johnstone* alongside his own pirated edition of Wilson’s *Memoirs* and included page reference to that edition in Johnstone’s text. Moreover, it is likely that he or one of his hacks had ghostwritten *Confessions of Julia Johnstone*, since Johnstone herself was probably dead at the time of publication. *Confessions of Julia Johnstone* sought to discredit Wilson by vigorously defending the reputations of the aristocrats she ‘slandered’, foregrounding her ‘low origins’ and venal motives, and accusing her, among many other things, of falsehood (‘she never did profess real truth’; 1825, p. 292), heartlessness (‘her lovers she threw off as indifferently as her shoes’; 1825, p. 244) – and depravity (‘a supreme goddess in the temple of profligacy’ who harboured a taste for her clients’ black servants; 1825, pp. 87–8, 115). It also richly abused Stockdale as a ‘harp[y] of the press’ (1825, p. 145), a ‘hacknied vendor in obscenity’ (1825, p. 5), and – as if to extend its tacit racializing of Wilson’s ‘passions’ – a ‘Caliban of the Colonade [sic]’ (1825, p. 129). Indeed, it was the claim that Wilson’s *Memoirs* were the product of a ‘cabal’ (meaning Wilson, her husband and Stockdale) that gave away the text’s origins in bitter Grub Street rivalries. [7]

So Benbow’s attacks on the *Memoirs* need to be understood as another means of deriving profits from the Wilson media event (though *Confessions of Julia Johnstone* was not itself a market success). But that does not quite account for their hysterical tone. For (as we shall see in more detail) Wilson’s *Memoirs* were a rich piece of writing as well as a complicated cultural event with which no rival could compete. The shrillness of *Confessions of Julia Johnstone* expresses that powerlessness, as does its conflicted response to Wilson’s literary efforts. Here Wilson becomes both a free inventor of falsehoods and a fraudulent plagiarist. *Confessions of Julia Johnstone* also identifies the popular novel – in particular, the female–authored Gothic romance and ‘tales of sentimental love’ (1825, p. 138) – as templates for Wilson’s writing. Calling her rival ‘the Salvator Rosa of low life’ (1825, p. 189) and her *Memoirs* ‘a work of fiction’ (1825, p. 17), ‘Johnstone’ goes on to apostrophize Wilson’s readership in an old fashioned baroque rhetoric that spins out of control:

*Ye, who listen with admiration, to the tales of other times, and gaze with idiotic rapture on the pictures of love, drawn by the erratic pencil of meandering fancy … Awake, arise, attend! … the criss-cross meeting of Mars and Venus. The planets cease to wheel in their orbs. The stars grow dim in their sphere. Truth and hope fly up to heaven. Nature shrinks; and over a slumbering world the goddess of Fiction waving her airy wand, rouses slander from her den; rumour with her thousand tongues, burst from her cave; curiosity bends forward with inquisitive looks, and malignity with eye-balls flashing the living fire, stands in anxious expectation to hear the vision of a demoniac’s brain, calculated to sow discord on the soil of harmony, break the bands of married felicity, and stamp with immortal infamy, the name of Harriette Wilson! (1825, pp. 137–8)*

---
page 170

The notion that the *Memoirs* heralded a new mode and stratum of low literature – a prostituted form of writing signified by ‘the name of Harriette Wilson’ – was widely shared among more respectable commentators than Benbow. In his popular satirical poem The Age Reviewed (1827), Robert Montgomery identified Wilson’s *Memoirs* as the source of a flood of writing about aristocratic life which encouraged a cultural climate of display and authorial self-promotion:

> *Since Harriet’s [sic] terse aristocratic tale,*
> *Improved the ton with memoirs of the frail,*
> *Lo, grey-haired vanity has mimed the dame,*
> *By printing records of forgotten shame.*
> (*The Age Reviewed*, part 2, pp. 171–2)

More specifically, but in a similar spirit, the author of ‘Loose Thoughts on Harriette Wilson’ in the *London Magazine* (associated with liberal intellectuals like William Hazlitt and Charles Lamb, as well as with Thomas De Quincey) drew attention to the book’s being a product of a dangerous alliance between a whore and a hack, which opened private lives to the public gaze and made literal the prostitution of commercialized and increasingly massified print. Yet the *London Magazine* also noted that, unlike earlier examples of the whore’s confessions, Wilson’s *Memoirs* instituted literary and social claims for itself, implying that ultimately its purpose was less to publicize Wilson’s own adventures than to display high life in the literary marketplace, or more precisely, the ‘peerage in deshabille’ (April 1825, p. 631). As such, it was, the *London Magazine* suggested ironically, ‘unquestionably the most genteel publication of the day’ (April 1825, p. 630), alongside the ‘silver-fork’ fiction of Theodore Hook, another retailer of aristocratic glamour to popular readers.

---
page 171

## Wilson and literary culture

As I have noted there is very little recent scholarship on Harriette Wilson. But she is a figure, albeit a marginal one, in Iain McCalman’s *Radical Underworld*. This is worth recalling at this point since McCalman’s Wilson is very remote from Wilson as a particular kind of silver-fork writer. For him, the *Memoirs* are available for the radical cause as a form of anti-aristocratic scandal literature; Wilson is, as he puts it, ‘a populist courtesan heroine’ (1993, p. 229). It may be that she represents a formation like that in the Queen Caroline affair and in Benbow’s spurious memoirs, but her own writings work rather differently. There her primary interest is not radical critique. In fact, she resolutely refuses any plebeian associations (shunning ‘commonness’ and ‘vulgarity’) and she does not take up the obvious oppositional class and gender identities available to her. Nor does she exploit the old connection between sexual libertinism and political and intellectual liberty, which, as McCalman has shown, still had some force in the ultra-radical world. Rather she explores the possibilities that have emerged within the mediatized literary culture itself; the possibility of new modes and styles of writerly self-presentation as enabled by the structure of the particular public sphere in which her celebrity was won.

Wilson’s talent for lively prose and clever observation was widely recognized – Sir Walter Scott credited her as ‘a good retail[er] of conversation’ and famously judged her *Memoirs* to be the superlative document of its genre; ‘beat[ing] Con Phillips, Anne Bellamy and all former demireps out and out’ (1972, p. 31). Yet this is to say too little. Wilson did not regard herself as a blackmailer, or even as a writer of prostitute memoirs. She had higher aims than that. Indeed, she was determined to convert her sexual celebrity into substantive literary capital. It is in these terms that we need to understand her aspirations to a certain literariness in the *Memoirs*. There she styles herself as a passionate reader and lover of literature, turning to her favourite books for relief from the rigours of the demirep role: ‘I am tired of flattery … [and] am now beginning to dislike society … I could rather read Shakespeare’s plays, *Gil Blas* or *The Vicar of
Wakefield*’ (1909, p. 329). More than that, she reveals she has long been an occasional author, trying her hand at poetry and stage writing – translating Molière for ‘amusement’ (1909, p. 264) – and submitting a manuscript to John Murray. And she represents herself as regularly (if somewhat improbably) snatching moments of writerly reflection between social events: ‘Having reached home too early for dinner, I sat down to consider the plan of a book in the style of the *Spectator*’ (1909, p. 293).

---
page 172

So Wilson’s attraction to literary values was not simply the affectation that many of her detractors assumed it to be – ‘Julia Johnstone’ ridiculed her ‘blue-stocking’ ambitions (1825, p. 30) and *Bell’s Life in London* remarked that her attempts at high style were ‘miserably defective’ (28 August, p. 183). Rather, her interest in literature was deep-seated. And it was strategic. Furthermore, the *Memoirs*’ articulation of connections between the literary and the amorous life hints at the libertinage (the combination of sexual licence and educated, highbrow values) that characterized the male aristocratic milieu in which Wilson moved. In this sense, Wilson’s construction of herself as a lover of literature needs to be understood as aiding her presentation of herself as an ‘excellent fellow’ – that is, as a facet of her ability to participate in the elite male world that sustained her.

Indeed, the *Memoirs* are in part a document of self-education, a Bildungsroman which charts the development of Wilson’s sexualized (though not conventionally gendered) literary persona as an extension of her professional role as a seller of sexual favours and a provider of good company to elite men. This is the logic that makes one particular incident in the *Memoirs* crucial. Early in her career Wilson retreats to an inn at Salt Hill with a carriage-load of books for the purpose of making herself more ‘worthy’ of her knowledgeable patrons (1909, p. 110). There she reads the Greeks and Romans, English parliamentary debate, Shakespeare’s plays (‘too amusing to be considered study’; 1909, p. 113), Racine, Voltaire, Rousseau and Boswell. It is at this moment that she appropriates the learning of a gentleman and can go on to incorporate literary tastes and writing practices as key elements of her demirep style. It is this moment too that forms a basis of the writerly self that authors the *Memoirs*.

We can turn to the text’s opening passage to see how Wilson’s learned demirep style translates into a distinctive authorial voice:

> *I shall not say why and how I became, at the age of fifteen, the mistress*
> *of the Earl of Craven. Whether it was love, or the severity of my father,*
> *the depravity of my own heart, or the winning arts of the noble lord,*
> *which induced me to leave my paternal roof and place myself under his*
> *protection, does not now much signify; or, if it does, I am not in the*
> *humour to gratify curiosity in this matter.* (Wilson 1909, p. 5)

This is the most quoted passage of the *Memoirs* and not by accident. It engages in a form of flaunting, a flagrant expression of a personal mood or humour which is something like a writerly form of the more

---
page 173

physical flaunting that formed part of the prostitute’s trade. At the very least, it is an expression of the bravado that marked Wilson’s passage through elite male worlds of, say, the military parade, the hunt or the dandy ball. It is humorous too, though the humour is entwined with aristocratic insouciance in a manner that establishes the blend of high-handedness and attention-seeking that characterizes the *Memoirs*’ mode of address.

If these opening sentences flaunt Wilson’s scandalous writing persona, they also forcefully announce her text’s departure from the conventions of the prostitute’s memoir. By declaring that she will *not* say why and how she became the mistress of the Earl of Craven, Wilson playfully withholds the first principle of the whore’s story: an original narrative of seduction that accounts for her fallen status. The *Memoirs* offer no self-defence and no confession of the kind that fuelled the earlier memoirs of Constantia Phillips or Laetitia Pilkington, for instance. Nor does it rely on the narrative patterns of transgression and rehabilitation habitual to the fallen woman stories of the sentimental school. Indeed, Wilson’s opening is captivating in part because it wrong-foots sentimental and scandalous traditions alike – flaunting the silence that veils her early own life and airily dismissing the myths of origin that structure the prostitute ‘life’ more generally. Paternal cruelty, moral failing and sexual temptation – these are narrative formulas that simply do not apply to Wilson because they are tied to notions of female virtue incompatible with her worldliness and libertinage.

In departing from the narrative logic of the whore’s story, the *Memoirs* turn to a rather different principle of composition: sheer narrative flow. It scorns dates and offers no formal chronology: its structuring principle is to be found in the narrator’s sequential movement from one protector to another. In the narration of that sequential movement Wilson aimed to present her readers with what she called ‘my very charming narrative of the facts in high life as they actually took place’ (1909, p. 149) – that is, with a non-fictional strain of the forms of fashionable writing that were popular in the novel and fiction market. The fashionable novel was an insider’s genre and Wilson was convinced that she, more than anyone, was ‘the thing itself’, the beating heart of fashion. If she was so, it was because her relation to fashion was – like fashion itself – transitory and, at a certain level, meretricious.

I have been speaking of the text’s flow as if it consists of the passage from narrated event to narrated event, but it is also a flow, punctuated

---
page 174

by frequent digressions, from one genre to another. In addition to her descriptions of high life, Wilson includes light social sketches of a kind common in the middlebrow journalism of the time; letters to her sister Fanny in a sentimental epistolary mode; an intensely romantic account of her love affair with Lord Ponsonby – an episode which Julia Johnstone sarcastically dubs ‘the romance of a demirep’ (1825, p. 139); quasi-sentimental travel writing – as in the account of her adventure in the Oxford mail coach, (1909, p. 439); politically motivated taunting of ‘great and honourable men’, including Wellington, in a mode borrowed from the radical press; self-reflexive accounts of the text’s reception in a ‘Postscript’ (signed by ‘Thomas Little’, a pseudonym used by Stockdale and taken from the fashionable writer Thomas Moore); and, in its extraordinary conclusion, a piece of literary composition in the high baroque style – an allegorical dream vision of life as a struggle between fortitude and passion.

Although it is a bricolage of available modes, this mix of genres does not lead to incoherence, since the text as a whole turns round a stable point: the narrator’s own highly stylized self and her dramatization of the writing process. In part this too is a byproduct of the text’s most immediate economic purpose: extorting suppression fees from ex-clients. At one level, the text was literally in flux: what could be published changed continually as clients paid up or failed to pay up. This indeterminacy became one of the text’s topics, and one that allowed the act of writing itself to be represented as an extemporary process, with exceptional vividness and presence.

> *here am I, seated on an easy chair at No. 111, in the Rue de Faubourg*
> *St. Honoré à Paris, writing, not for the benefit of my readers, but for my*
> *own amusement and profit to boot, and in the full expectation that my*
> *work is to pass the twentieth edition! Apropos, I have just got a letter from*
> *Stockdale, who tells me he has hopes, even beyond what he at first antici-*
> *pated, as to the success of my Memoirs … Love me, love my dog!* (Wilson 1909, p. 228)

It is passages like this that allow us to recognize that it was Wilson’s voice, as much as her story, that constituted her writing’s unity and appeal. And despite, or perhaps because of her desultory tone, they also suggest that, for Wilson at least, writing related not just to recalling the details of her scandalous past, but to cultivating a singular authorial persona that laid bare the facts of her present (no less scandalous) life circumstances – a life on the Continent funded by extortion fees. What

---
page 175

the text offers is, in fact, a kind of ‘life writing’ in the contemporary sense. And yet Wilson foregrounds and exposes herself in terms that refuse to reveal her interiority. In that teasing refusal, she is setting up a play of withholding and disclosure, which also returns the reader to the trade which forms the original basis of her notoriety. What she is offering to the public is not all there is. This withholding of self also gestures at her writing’s other purpose (extortion) and its second readership (ex-lovers) by suggesting that the text’s secrets are not all out and that there might well be more to come. In this sense the real
Harriette Wilson is not, and never has been, available.

We can make these points in slightly different terms by observing, as many of Wilson’s critics did, that the modes of posturing for male audiences that were part of her professional repertoire were not dissimilar to the forms of self promotion required within literary culture. One satirical cartoon, for instance, entitled ‘La Coterie Debouché’, offered a frontispiece design for the *Memoirs* which depicted Wilson’s writing as an explicit act of sexual self display (see Figure 5). She is seated at a table with her pen poised above a manuscript, her legs spread provocatively and her free hand gesturing at masturbation. The group of illustrious men attending her murmur pretty compliments while gazing intensely at her act of writing, and just beyond it, in the same line of vision, her sexualized body. The image turns upon a crude misogynist joke about the sexual curiosity that underpinned Wilson’s readership, but it also gestures toward the ways in which her writing sought to extend the dynamics of the demirep coterie into the broader public sphere of print. The *Memoirs* were conditioned by the structures of show in which the courtesan was surrounded by a circle of elite male admirers, and beyond them a wider (but still largely male) public who read the gossip columns, viewed the theatre boxes from the pit or the gallery, gazed curiously at famous bodies in the fashionable walks and parks where the demirep showed herself or rather showed, as Wilson put it, her ‘loose morals and … striking elegant dress’ (1909, p. 297). This was a public whose gaze was also on that smaller and constantly changing group of her lovers, themselves a group who constituted something between a public and a private circle. And even for that group, the object at the very centre – the woman herself – was veiled by the dazzle of what was on display – the loose morals, the dresses, the manners, the wit, the style.

Wilson hoped to extend the success of her *Memoirs* into a literary career and went on to write two (unsuccessful) novels. The first, *Paris Lions and London Tigers* (1825), a story of an English family’s adventures

---
page 176

Figure 5 H. H. [Heath], ‘La Coterie Debouché’, 1825 (reproduced by permission of the British Museum).

---
page 177

in Parisienne fashionable circles, was published by Stockdale just two weeks after the serialization of the *Memoirs* ended. Like her regular newsletter from Paris – which was conceived as an anchor piece for Stockdale’s short-lived newspaper, Stockdale’s Budget (1826–7) – it was part of an effort to trade upon the *Memoirs*’ success. The second, self-published novel, *Clara Gazul, or Honi soit qui mal y pense* (1830),[8] was written as Wilson’s celebrity had begun to fade and was conceived in earnest as ‘a sort of female *Gil Blas*’ (‘Letter to Bulwer-Lytton’, August 1829, cited in Sadleir 1933, p. 238). It presented an unlikely blend of ‘modern’ Gothic romance (also set in Paris) and sketches of London high life, related in a mode which, like the *Memoirs*, blended the fashionable sketch and life writing. Wilson seems to have found fiction writing conducive to disclosure. Clara Gazul’s introduction told in detail the story of her early life, which famously had been withheld from the *Memoirs*. And the novel itself included a character named ‘Harriette Memoir’, a more accurate, or at least more modest, self-portrait than was contained in the *Memoirs*. Yet here again Wilson is playing with private and public modes of writing in a move which inverts their conventional relation. For her, the scandalous memoir was an occasion for fictional posturing and self-fashioning, while fiction provided a veil that licensed confessional discourse.

Wilson’s literary aspirations also took a more social form. She attempted to become acquainted with at least two famous male writers in terms which, once again, exploited her amalgamation of sexual flaunting and literary values. She wrote to Byron in 1814 and 1820, soliciting a friendship which hovered between the ‘amatory and the intellectual’ (Quennell 1935, p. 416). Byron resisted, declaring ‘a writer is … very different from his productions’ (‘Letter to Harriette Wilson’ 1814, cited in Byron 1975, p. 89). This seems somewhat disingenuous since, like Wilson herself, Byron’s success depended precisely upon a knowing confusion between his life and his texts. Wilson, undeterred, persisted, fantasizing the pressure of Byron’s lips ‘wild and eager as your poetry’ (‘Letter to Byron’ 31 May 1820, cited in Blanch 1955, p. 499), and wittily telling him that she had taken *Don Juan* to bed with her (‘Letter to Byron’, 1820, cited in Blanch 1955, p. 500). For all that, Byron and Wilson seem never to have met, which did not prevent her from imagining a physical encounter between them in the *Memoirs*. They met by chance, she claimed, at a famous masquerade ball, where each recognized the other simply by dint of their extraordinary passion and physical singularity. There Wilson declares to Byron:

---
page 178

> *Now would I forswear love, which has hitherto been my all, to follow you*
> *to banishment or to death, so that I could be considered your equal,*
> *worthy to be consulted by you as a friend; for, though I do not know you,*
> *yet I guess that you are on earth and that there’s nothing like you.* (1909, p. 619)

It is for Byron alone that Wilson becomes Byronic. But the irony of her Byronism is clear. After all, she had become a version of her other lovers too. In the *Memoirs* Byronism becomes not just a rhetoric and a performance, but a whore’s rhetoric and performance. So Wilson’s irony wins a difficult game: it trumps Byron from within the world of fashion and celebrity, a world which, we should not forget, demireps played their part in binding together.

After the publication of her *Memoirs*, Wilson corresponded with Bulwer-Lytton, then a Byron imitator, who, after the 1827 publication of *Pelham*, had become the king of the Society novel. But the Bulwer- Lytton correspondence is very different from that with Byron. Wilson is no longer a supplicant. Instead, she emphasizes the pre-emptive relationship between her *Memoirs* and the silver-fork novel, confidently telling Bulwer-Lytton she is a better writer than he is, because she is ‘the thing itself’ (‘Letter to Bulwer-Lytton’ August 1829, cited in Sadleir 1933, p. 236) and playfully suggesting he hire her to complete his love scenes. The reason she need not defer to Bulwer-Lytton seems to be that she regarded her own demirep position as best placed to capture and exploit the scandals of the beau monde precisely because it was situated between the insiders and their onlookers. Which is to say that by this time in her career, Wilson fully understood that the demimonde was a crucial axis between the elite fashionable world and the dissemination of its glamour in popular print. After all, she had forged a libertine conception of authorship which foreclosed notions of respectability and virtue that had previously constrained female novelists, and was untroubled by the guilt and distaste that beset pedigreed aristocrat-novelists like Bulwer-Lytton. Nor could she be accused of the forms of emulative ‘vulgarity’ that characterized the work of Theodore Hook, or more adept middle-class Society novelists like Benjamin Disraeli (who was beginning his literary career in the later 1820s).

Yet the uniqueness and boldness of Wilson’s project – its relaying of sexual commerce into a media event that in turn opened out into a form of literary writing – was precisely what doomed it to a limited, if predictable afterlife. Her Memoirs have not been regarded as the innovative piece of writing that they were – a canny adaptation of the forms

---
page 179

and functions of demimonde sociability for the larger, print public sphere. Nor has the particular blend of publicity seeking and literary ambition that informed their production been fully recognized. Indeed Wilson has not been remembered primarily as a writer at all, but as a colourful bit player in the Regency of collective memory – an imagined Regency of libertinage and dash.

There is, however, a kind of triumph even in this marginalisation. For the popular conception of the rakish Regency is one that Wilson herself helped to create. That conception has been forged in the media apparatus which produced Wilson’s own celebrity and its appeal turns in part upon its presentation of the fashionable world as a tableau vivant in the manner that Wilson pioneered. Indeed, in very specific terms, in cultivating her personal myth as the period’s unrivalled ‘demirep of fashion’ (Johnstone 1825, p. 115), Wilson shaped the raffish profiles of several of her best-known contemporaries. Her withering caricatures of her lovers(including, most famously, Wellington, the ‘Iron Duke’, as a ‘rat-catcher’ (1909, p. 65), and an emasculated Worcester – ‘poor Worcey’, as she called him (1909, p. 503) – toasting her muffins and lacing her stays) remain in circulation as comic set pieces of the Regency myth.

Wilson, of course had aimed to write literary sketches, not historical anecdote, but her writing could become a template for popular public memory precisely because her authorial techniques created a text that has remained readable across generations. It has done so not despite being a product of the ‘debased’ print environment of the Regency’s literary and media ‘underworld’, but just because it was a product of that world. It is perhaps fitting then that we view Wilson’s book not only as a prostitute’s memoir, but as a monument of the ‘prostituted’ public sphere, for which it became a byword. Wilson shows, first, that that public sphere was able to enmesh literary and media values and purposes (and ought not to be condescended to) and, second, that a woman’s sexuality, when openly commodified, strategized and textualized, could be a powerful instrument for the creation of new and democratized reading publics. In these terms her libertine celebrity asks to be reinterpreted as an exemplary case in the pre-history of a contemporary culture which is no longer under the sway of traditional hierarchies.

*University of Queensland*

---
page 180

## Notes

1. See for instance Blanch (1955), Thirkell (1936), Sadleir (1933), Bourne (1975), Myer (1999) and Woolf (1947).
2. The authorship of The English Spy is generally attributed to Charles Westmacott. See McCalman (1993, p. 226) for an assertion that its writer was Thomas Ashe, a hack author in Westmacott’s employ.
3. The pamphlet, titled Memoirs of the Life of the Celebrated Mrs. Q------, was published in 1822 under Benbow’s pseudonym, ‘Edward Eglantine, Esquire’. Its account of Wilson’s life bears little relation to her own. It claims that she was well born and genteelly educated in rural Lincolnshire, before departing
for London to make her way in the world as a ‘demirep of quality’ (1822, p. 1) under her married name, ‘Mrs. Q—‘. The text presents Wilson’s semi-respectable status – as both a ‘wife’ and a ‘whore’ – as a point of particular interest for readers, and it attributes her fall from virtue to her early elopement to Gretna Green with a handsome ensign, later ‘Captain Q—’. There, it claims, ‘in the holy bands of matrimony, Miss Harriet [sic] W—n became the since far-famed Mrs. Q.’ (1822, p. 11).
4. Wilson’s teasing allusion to Matthew Lewis’s Gothic/libertine novel, *The Monk*, is perhaps an exception. She uses it to make an elliptical reference to her first sexual encounter with the Duke of Argyll: ‘A late hour in the morning blushed to find us in the arms of each other, as Monk Lewis or somebody else says …’ (1909, p. 32).
5. The production and consumption of obscene material was not unlawful but a clause added to the Vagrancy Act in 1824 made their exhibition in public places a punishable offence. See Mudge (2000, p. 246).
6. See, for instance, Blanch (1955) and Myer (1999).
7. Stockdale believed that Confessions of Julia Johnstone was authored by Jack Mitford, a hack writer in Benbow’s regular employ, who had written an earlier pro-Caroline satire A Peep into Wr Castle, after the Lost Mutton (1820) in which Wilson had featured as the Regent’s mistress. See Thirkell (1936, p. 275).
8. The title was borrowed from Prosper Mérimée’s Théâtre de Clara Gazul (1825).

## Works cited
Adburgham, A. 1983, *Silver Fork Society: Fashionable Life and Literature from 1814–1840*, London: Constable.
‘Autobiography’ 1827, *Quarterly Review*, vol. XXXV, pp. 148–65.
*Bell’s Life in London and Sporting Chronicle*.
Bourne, K. (ed.) 1975, *The Blackmailing of the Chancellor: Some Intimate and Hitherto Unpublished Letters from Harriette Wilson to Her Friend Henry Brougham, Lord Chancellor of England*, London: Lemon Tree Press.
Blanch, L. (ed.) 1955, *The Game of Hearts: Harriette Wilson’s Memoirs, Interspersed with Excerpts from the Confessions of Julia Johnstone, Her Rival*, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Byron, G.G.N., Baron 1975, *Byron’s Letters and Journals*, ed. L.A. Marchand, London: J. Murray.
Eglantine, E. [pseud. of Benbow] [1822], *Memoirs of the Life of the Celebrated Mrs. Q------*, London: Benbow.
Johnstone, J. 1825, *Confessions of Julia Johnstone, Written by Herself. In Contradiction to the Fables of Harriette Wilson*, London: Benbow.

---
page 181

‘Loose Thoughts on Harriette Wilson’ April 1825, *London Magazine*, New Series, vol. I, pp. 626–31.
McCalman, I. 1993, *Radical Underworld: Prophets, Revolutionaries, and Pornographers in London, 1795–1840*, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Montgomery, R. 1827, *The Age Reviewed*, London: W. Carpenter.
Mudge, B.K. 2000, *The Whore’s Story: Women, Pornography, and the British Novel, 1684–1830*, New York: Oxford University Press.
Myer, V.G. 1999, *Harriette Wilson: Lady of Pleasure*, Ely: Fern House.
Quennell, P. 1935, ‘*Byron and Harriette Wilson*’, Cornhill Magazine, vol. CLI, pp. 415–26.
Thirkell, A. 1936, *The Fortunes of Harriette: The Surprising Career of Harriette Wilson*, London: H. Hamilton.
Sadleir, M. 1933, *Bulwer and His Wife: A Panorama, 1803–1836*, London: Constable.
Scott, W. 1972, *The Journal of Sir Walter Scott*, ed. W.E.K. Anderson, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[Westmacott, C.M.] 1826, *The English Spy: An Original Work, Characteristic, Satirical, and Humorous, Comprising Scenes and Sketches in Every Rank of Society, Being Portraits of the Illustrious, Eminent, Eccentric and Notorious. Drawn from the Life of Bernard Blackmantle; The Illustrations Designed by Robert Cruikshank*, London: Sherwood, Gilbert & Piper.
Wilson, H. 1825, *Paris Lions and London Tigers*, London: J.J. Stockdale.
Wilson, H. 1830, *Clara Gazul, or Honi soit qui mal y pense*, 2 vols, New York: S. & D.A. Forbes.
Wilson, H. [1825], 1909, *The Memoirs of Harriette Wilson Written by Herself*, 2 vols, London: E. Nash.
Woolf, V. 1947, *Harriette Wilson’, in The Moment and Other Essays*, London: Hogarth Press, pp. 145–9.