# [Sex Liberty and License in the Eighteenth Century](https://www.academia.edu/1609375/_Sex_Liberty_and_Licence_in_the_Eighteenth_Century_Co_authored_with_Peter_Cryle_In_Libertine_Enlightenment_Sex_Liberty_and_Licence_in_the_Eighteenth_Century_Ed_Peter_Cryle_and_Lisa_O_Connell_London_Palgrave_2004_1_14)

page 5

In attempting to trace the dissemination of eighteenth-century libertinism, we might recall Foucault's famous remarks about Borges's Chinese encyclopedia. Foucault notes that the entities and classifications of the past appear heteroclite because we have great difficulty apprehending the historical commonplaces of knowledge in which they were gathered.[3] This is the challenge to which we respond as we work inductively from the material collected in this volume to identify certain recurring tendencies of libertinage. Our book's tripartite structure signposts a provisional ordering. The discussion begins with 'disquieting theories', in which we gather evidence for the increasingly popular thrust of eighteenth-century libertinism. We notice an insistent thread of libertine behaviour across a broad spectrum of mainstream enlightenment figures, extending from the cases of the 'grand' European libertines, Casanova and Sade, to the related 'weak libertinage' (to use Simon During's term) of the lives and works of English dissident figures, John Wilkes and Laurence Sterne, and the unexpected sexual controversies and ambivalences that attached to the liberal thought of both Voltaire and Kant, neither of whom were remotely rakish. All of these cases in one way or another unsettle the terms in which the relation between 'libertine' discourse and action has been conventionally understood, precisely by pointing to their deep imbrication, the insistent circularity with which free thought fed into embodied, often sexualized behaviours. This is what Diderot means when he says in the introduction to Le Neveu de Rameau (c.1761), 'I abandon my mind to all its libertinage'. Libertine thinking is not outside philosophy; rather Diderot knows, as he famously reminds us, that 'his thoughts are his strumpets' (1962, p. 395).

Yet strumpetry and female sexuality were not mere metaphors. Diderot's remark raises the question of how women were positioned by the explicitly sexualized intellectualism of enlightenment. Our consid- eration of 'improper women', a selection of neglected European and British female sexual adventurers -- Constantia Phillips, Jeanne de La Motte, Harriette Wilson, Delarivier Manley -- and of the lowly genres to which their self-representations were limited (namely the confessional autobiography, the prostitute memoir, and scandal fiction) introduces a much needed discussion of the particularities and contradictions that characterized enactments and representations of libertine femininity in this period. The retrieval of neglected libertine women is particularly important to our project for, as Kathleen Wilson postulates, it is here that we see most vividly the increasingly audacious appropriations of aristocratic libertinage, across the barriers of class and gender. These

---
page 6

are especially compelling evidence for high libertinism's trickledown effect -- whereby self-aware sexual freedom became available for a range of new individual, political and commercial purposes within the sphere of print.

Drawing upon the broadest implications of this insight, our discussion concludes with a survey of 'spurious practices', some of the highly functional forms of libertinage that were spread abroad in the later part of the century. Here the cases of marginal and unfamiliar libertines such as the radical pamphleteer, Charles Pigott, and electromagnetic theorist, medical therapist and quack, James Graham, join with Count Cagliostro, perhaps Europe's most renowned and successful imposter/swindler to underscore the radical and eccentric dimensions of libertine enlightenment. Glancing back at the contents of the volume from the vantage point of Wald Lasowski's own account of libertine looseness and defiance, we see an array of disrespectful cultural phenomena which, while retaining some connections to the traditions of philosophical critique and of aristocratic licence whence they came, cannot be understood as consistently oppositional. Their anti-authoritarianism encompasses the lofty and the scurrilous -- characteristically flirting with both -- and their purposes include sexual blackmail, commercial entertainment, self-promotion, sexual, literary and philosophical experiment, vindication, memorialization, virulent satire, political agitation, scandalmongering and, of course, pleasure.

---
page 8

Indeed, some of the things studied here may appear unimportant at first, and have been deemed so by scholarly tradition. Iain McCalman, in his essay, announces an interest in the Diamond Necklace Affair, which was, as he says, ‘long sidelined as trivial by decades of Annalist and Marxist scholarship’. Similarly, Lisa O’Connell notes that Harriette Wilson, despite her great notoriety during the Regency as a demi-mondaine, and despite the media sensation caused by her *Memoirs*, remains largely unnoticed in current critical and scholarly work in part because the showy, superficial persona she cultivated has deflected serious analysis. Jonathan Mee points out that historians have overlooked the role of Charles Pigott’s *The Jockey Club*’s in the Revolution controversy largely because of its unworthy style and genre.

---
page 9

Alongside the persistent networks of sex, liberty and licence
described here, libertinism is regularly the occasion for a range of less
familiar fusions and encounters. High cultures bleed into low: our
quacks, Count Cagliostro and James Graham, for instance, were self-
conscious exponents of the sublime. But exaltation can turn to parody,
and the charlatan readily becomes the object of irony. The narrative
destiny of the impostor, as Christa Knellwolf’s essay suggests, is doubt-
less always to be unmasked, and so the thematic of charlatanism holds
together both the exalted and the laughable. Tradition fosters enlight-
enment: as Nicola Parson argues in her essay on Manley’s New Atalantis
(1709), court cultures of secrecy and gossip contributed to a fledgling
public sphere based upon reportage and transparency. Similarly, Jon

---
page 10

Mee and Lisa O’Connell demonstrate the ways in which scandalous
representations of elite culture of the kind produced by Charles Pigott
and Harriette Wilson built new reading publics even as they equivo-
cated about the politics of aristocratic licence. Literary autonomy and
political transformation are momentarily merged in Simon During’s
analysis of the popularizing projects of Laurence Sterne and John
Wilkes. And finally the boundaries between Europeans and indigenous
and colonized peoples are repeatedly overdrawn and unsettled around
the enlightened exploration of unconventional sexualities, and partic-
ularly by anticipations of libertine female behaviour within exotic cul-
tures, the Polynesian variant of which Kathleen Wilson calls ‘Pacific
libertinage’.

As we might expect, the 'strongest' and the 'weakest' libertine figures in our book are female. Chantal Thomas, in her explicitly feminine reading of Casanova's memoirs, draws attention to 'Henriette', who was hardly a woman to be seduced and abandoned. It is 'Henriette' who chooses the time and manner to leave Casanova, and reappears hauntingly when least expected. She seems to understand his forgetting better than he does, inscribing it for him and practising it more thoroughly than he. Con Phillips, one of the most beautiful women of her time, built a transaltantic reputation as an extravagant sexual predator, as Kathleen Wilson shows. Bravery and determination, in Phillips' case, went hand in hand with a remarkable gift for conspicuousness. Her autobiography, like so many libertine novels of the time, portrayed the victimized woman ready to share her worldly experience for the sake of young women readers who might otherwise succumb to the same deceptive moves. Jeanne de La Motte constructed herself, in borrowed story-lines, as a *déclassée* victim. But she also built and recounted a great career as a courtesan. Sustained bravado and barefaced audacity led her to that most characteristic of libertine achievements: not just wealth and glamour, but a true *succès de scandale* which contributed to the disgrace of Marie-Antoinette and the downfall of the French monarchy. Harriette Wilson, in turn, was a high-profile demi-mondaine of Regency times whose *Memoirs* did not seek to tell a story of feminine victimhood or heroism, but to convert her inside knowledge of the libertinism of her aristocratic patrons into cash.

Yet while all of these women took the liberty of using their sexuality to unshackle themselves from men and to inscribe themselves as the subjects of their own riveting narratives (or, in 'Henriette''s case, a simple yet telling inscription as rendered by Casanova), their stories

---
page 11

also tend to demonstrate the ineluctable liabilities of female libertinage. For libertine men sexual freedom was very often a means to an end – Wilkes’s irreverent rakishness for instance served a political purpose – his emphatically phallic masculinity contributed to his popular aura while undoubtedly also affording him great pleasure. Our female rakes, by contrast, very quickly encounter the limits of instrumental sexuality. However hard she may try, the libertine woman cannot pass herself off as an enlightened subject – a *philosophe*, say, or a politician, a (wo)man of letters, a cosmopolitan, a fashionable figure, a charlatan, or even a libertine. This is because the moment she becomes a public woman, her identity is collapsed into her conspicuous sexuality.

And so Phillips, La Motte and Wilson – all flagrantly sexual women – were castigated as wantons and whores. If they indulged in the playful circularity of libertine thought and action – Diderot’s flirtatious cogitation – they did so at their own peril because for them the experiment of sexual freedom quickly flattened out into the age-old moral scripts of punishment and redemption rather than new horizons of enlightened self-possession. When Harriette Wilson, for instance, sought to transform her sexual notoriety into a form of literary authority, modelling her efforts on those of her hero, Lord Byron, she failed spectacularly – her novels were dismissed as the definitive product of a debased print marketplace. Or when Con Phillips criticized the barbarity and injustice of English social and sexual mores, her words only fuelled the perception of her own depravity now sourced in the Caribbean culture to which she had been exposed. These cases crystallize the way in which the libertine woman was not just figured as a whore, but readily transformed into an all-purpose metaphor for the description of larger cultural crises and conditions. We need to remember that her male counterparts, however egregiously liberal and anti-authoritarian, were rarely so treated.

There is much to be said about scandal in our corpus. It is something more than gossip, if gossip is understood as unrestrained occasional talk. Scandal is the making-public of the private. Intimate matters are committed to discourse, and the noble stances of literary production become indistinguishable from the scurrilous, the prurient, and the self-righteous. Nicola Parsons’ essay shows the cultural work than went on in the representation and dissemination of the stylized, class-bound secrets of the Whig oligarchy in the early part of the century. And Jonathan Mee shows the interdependence, in Charles Pigott’s case, of radical politics and scandal-mongering in the 1790s. Bruiting abroad

---
page 12

the intimate secrets of the upper classes allows the (libertine) subject of sex to serve the (libertine) purpose of denouncing corruption in high places, so that libertinage is engaged on all fronts. Harriette Wilson’s Memoirs are surrounded by a trade in suppression fees that requires continual adjustment in the writing process. Libertine scandal is never more evident, never more richly overdetermined than when Jeanne de La Motte eventually reconstructs swindle and blackmail, in the Diamond Necklace Affair, as revolutionary heroism.